Add guide about extending Lisk Indexer service (#1933)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/integrate-blockchain/aggregate-blockchain-data/extend-indexer.adoc

By default, it only implements the business logic for all the available commands from the Lisk SDK. The `applyTransaction` and `revertTransaction` hooks implement the indexing logic and are specific to each available command.

Every time a new block is added to the chain, the xref:{url_newBlock_event}[chain_newBlock] event is triggered.
When the new block contains transactions, the corresponding `applyTransaction` hook is invoked internally to process the transaction and its parameters.
For example, in this guide, we demonstrate the `applyTransaction` hook implemented corresponding to the `transfer` transaction from the `token` module.
The hook indexes the addresses of all accounts engaged in the transaction.
This information can help us determine the number of active accounts on the chain.

The `revertTransaction` hook is triggered when processing an included transaction within a deleted block while processing the xref:{url_deleteBlock_event}[chain_deleteBlock] event.
The node triggers the `chain_deleteBlock` event when it deletes blocks from it's current chain to reorganize itself to a different fork on the network.

> The `revertTransaction` hook can then be customized to delete or manipulate the transaction data present in the Indexer service's database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `revertTransaction` hook can then be customized to delete or manipulate the transaction data present in the Indexer microservice's database.
```

			event.topics.includes(tx.id),
	);

	if (filterInitializeUserAccountEvent) {
		const formattedTransaction = await requestConnector('formatTransaction', {
			transaction: tx,
			additionalFee: filterInitializeUserAccountEvent.data.initializationFee,
		});

		tx.minFee = formattedTransaction.minFee;
	}

	const transactionsTable = await getTransactionsTable();
	logger.trace(`Indexing transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
	await transactionsTable.upsert(tx, dbTrx);
	logger.debug(`Indexed transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
};

// [...]
----
+
. In the case whereby the block is deleted, update the Lisk Indexer microservice database by deleting the corresponding `recipientAddress` through the `revertTransaction` hook.
+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
// [...]

const revertTransaction = async (blockHeader, tx, events, dbTrx) => {
	logger.trace(
		`Updating index for the account with address ${tx.params.recipientAddress} asynchronously.`,
	);
	indexAccountAddress(tx.params.recipientAddress);
};

module.exports = {
	COMMAND_NAME,
	applyTransaction,
	revertTransaction,
};
----
+ 

> . Now, whenever a token transfer transaction is executed on the chain, Lisk Service's Blockchain Indexer microservice will extract the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and will index it in the list of active accounts, which can be served to applications such as Lisk Wallet upon request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Now, whenever a token transfer transaction is executed on the chain, Lisk Service's Blockchain Indexer microservice will extract the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and index it in the list of active accounts, which can be served to applications such as Lisk Wallet upon request.
```

:url_pos: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/pos

//Internal Docs URLs
:url_newBlock_event: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc#chain_newblock
:url_deleteBlock_event: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc#chain_deleteblock

The Blockchain Indexer service is primarily responsible for indexing all the blockchain information, based on the scheduled jobs by the Blockchain Coordinator.
In the data service mode, it serves user request queries made via the RESTful API or WebSocket-based RPC calls. It can run both the indexer and data service modes simultaneously and is enabled by default.

This microservice encapsulates most of the business logic for the Lisk Service API.
By default, it only implements the business logic for all the available commands from the Lisk SDK. The `applyTransaction` and `revertTransaction` hooks implement the indexing logic and are specific to each available command.

Every time a new block is added to the chain, the xref:{url_newBlock_event}[chain_newBlock] event is triggered.
The `applyTransaction` hook is called in response to the `chain_newBlock` event.

> The data of the new transactions can then be used by the Indexer service for any customized logic, for example, in this guide, the `applyTransaction` hook is extended to record the addresses of all accounts that have performed any activity in the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data of the new transactions can then be used by the Indexer service for any customized logic. For example, in this guide the `applyTransaction` hook is extended to capture the addresses of all accounts that have engaged in any activity within the network.
```

The `revertTransaction` hook is triggered when processing an included transaction within a deleted block while processing the xref:{url_deleteBlock_event}[chain_deleteBlock] event.

> The `chain_deleteBlock` event is triggered to cater to the finalized height, for example, if the finalized block height of the blockchain is 95 and some nodes are at height 97 then, the `chain_deleteBlock` event will be triggered on such nodes and the additional two blocks will be deleted from the nodes as well to sync with the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `chain_deleteBlock` event is triggered to cater to the finalized height. For example, if the finalized block height of the blockchain is 95 and some nodes are at a height of 97, then the `chain_deleteBlock` event will be triggered on such nodes, and the additional two blocks will be deleted from these nodes as well in order to sync with the network.
```

The `revertTransaction` hook can then be customized to delete or manipulate the transaction data present in the Indexer service's database.

== Extending the Indexer service
The `applyTransaction` and `revertTransaction` hooks are arranged per command in a file and are grouped by the module that they belong to.
Existing hooks are located in the {url_sharedIndexer_directory}[shared/indexer/transactionProcessor^] directory.
Command-specific hooks are always implemented within a single file and are grouped by the module.

> To extend Lisk Service, and implement hooks for a custom module, see the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To extend Lisk Service, and implement hooks for a custom module, perform the following steps:
```

. Create a sub-directory with the module name. For example: {url_token}[token^].
. Add {url_index}[index.js^] under the above directory.
. Export a `MODULE_NAME` variable.
The value must match the module name as registered within the application.
+
.index.js
[source,js]
----
const MODULE_NAME = 'token';

module.exports = {
	MODULE_NAME,
};
----
+

> . Create a file specific to the command for which there is a need to implement the custom hooks. For example: {url_transfer}[transfer.js^].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a file specific to the command that requires the implementation of custom hooks. For example: {url_transfer}[transfer.js^].
```

. Export a `COMMAND_NAME` variable. The value must match the command name as registered within the application.
You should also define database instances, import constants, and logger, etc.
+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
const {
	Logger,
	DB: {
		MySQL: { getTableInstance },
	},
} = require('lisk-service-framework');
const config = require('../../../../config');

const { TRANSACTION_STATUS } = require('../../../constants');
const { indexAccountAddress } = require('../../accountIndex');
const { requestConnector } = require('../../../utils/request');

const logger = Logger();

const MYSQL_ENDPOINT = config.endpoints.mysql;

const transactionsTableSchema = require('../../../database/schema/transactions');

const getTransactionsTable = () => getTableInstance(transactionsTableSchema, MYSQL_ENDPOINT);

// Command specific constants
const COMMAND_NAME = 'transfer';

const EVENT_NAME_INITIALIZE_USER_ACCOUNT = 'initializeUserAccount';

// [...]
----
+

> . Take out the `recipientAddress` out of the transaction and then store it in the Lisk Indexer service database via the `applyTransaction` hook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Take out the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and then store it in the Lisk Indexer service database via the `applyTransaction` hook.
```

+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
// [...]

const applyTransaction = async (blockHeader, tx, events, dbTrx) => {
	logger.trace(
		`Updating index for the account with address ${tx.params.recipientAddress} asynchronously.`,
	);
	indexAccountAddress(tx.params.recipientAddress);

	if (tx.executionStatus !== TRANSACTION_STATUS.SUCCESSFUL) return;

	tx = {
		...tx,
		...tx.params,
	};

	const filterInitializeUserAccountEvent = events.find(
		event =>
			event.name === EVENT_NAME_INITIALIZE_USER_ACCOUNT &&
			event.data.address === tx.params.recipientAddress &&
			event.topics.includes(tx.id),
	);

	if (filterInitializeUserAccountEvent) {
		const formattedTransaction = await requestConnector('formatTransaction', {
			transaction: tx,
			additionalFee: filterInitializeUserAccountEvent.data.initializationFee,
		});

		tx.minFee = formattedTransaction.minFee;
	}

	const transactionsTable = await getTransactionsTable();
	logger.trace(`Indexing transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
	await transactionsTable.upsert(tx, dbTrx);
	logger.debug(`Indexed transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
};

// [...]
----
+

> . In case, the block is deleted, update the Lisk Indexer service database by deleting the corresponding `recipientAddress` through the `revertTransaction` hook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the case whereby the block is deleted, update the Lisk Indexer service database by deleting the corresponding `recipientAddress` through the `revertTransaction` hook.
```

+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
// [...]

const revertTransaction = async (blockHeader, tx, events, dbTrx) => {
	logger.trace(
		`Updating index for the account with address ${tx.params.recipientAddress} asynchronously.`,
	);
	indexAccountAddress(tx.params.recipientAddress);
};

module.exports = {
	COMMAND_NAME,
	applyTransaction,
	revertTransaction,
};
----
+ 
. Now, whenever a token transfer transaction is executed on the chain, Lisk Indexer Service will take out the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and will keep it in the list of active accounts, which can be served to applications such as Lisk Wallet upon request.

> For more examples of extending the Indexer service for various modules and their commands, see:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more examples of extending the Indexer service for various modules and their commands, see the following list:
```

> = Extending the Indexer service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Extending the Indexer microservice
```

:url_transfer: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/blob/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/token/transfer.js
:url_index: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/blob/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/token/index.js
:url_sharedIndexer_directory: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor
:url_auth: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/auth
:url_interoperability: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/interoperability
:url_legacy: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/legacy
:url_pos: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/tree/development/services/blockchain-indexer/shared/indexer/transactionProcessor/pos

//Internal Docs URLs
:url_newBlock_event: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc#chain_newblock
:url_deleteBlock_event: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc#chain_deleteblock

> The Blockchain Indexer service is primarily responsible for indexing all the blockchain information, based on the scheduled jobs by the Blockchain Coordinator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Blockchain Indexer microservice is primarily responsible for indexing all the blockchain information, based on the scheduled jobs by the Blockchain Coordinator.
```

> In the data service mode, it serves user request queries made via the RESTful API or WebSocket-based RPC calls. It can run both the indexer and data service modes simultaneously and is enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the data service mode, it serves user request queries made via the RESTful API or the WebSocket-based RPC calls. It can run both the indexer and data service modes simultaneously, both enabled by default.
```

This microservice encapsulates most of the business logic for the Lisk Service API.
By default, it only implements the business logic for all the available commands from the Lisk SDK. The `applyTransaction` and `revertTransaction` hooks implement the indexing logic and are specific to each available command.

Every time a new block is added to the chain, the xref:{url_newBlock_event}[chain_newBlock] event is triggered.

> The `applyTransaction` hook is called in response to the `chain_newBlock` event.
> The data of the new transactions can then be used by the Indexer service for any customized logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the new block contains transactions, the corresponding `applyTransaction` hook is invoked internally to process the transaction and its parameters.
```

> For example, in this guide the `applyTransaction` hook is extended to capture the addresses of all accounts that have engaged in any activity within the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in this guide we demonstrate the `applyTransaction` hook implemented corresponding to the `transfer` transaction from the `token` module. The hook indexes the addresses of all accounts engaged in the transaction. This information can help us determine the number of accounts on the chain.
```

The `revertTransaction` hook is triggered when processing an included transaction within a deleted block while processing the xref:{url_deleteBlock_event}[chain_deleteBlock] event.

> The `chain_deleteBlock` event is triggered to cater to the finalized height.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The node triggers the`chain_deleteBlock` event when it deletes blocks from it's current chain to reorganize itself to a different fork on the network.
```

> For example, if the finalized block height of the blockchain is 95 and some nodes are at a height of 97, then the `chain_deleteBlock` event will be triggered on these nodes, and the additional two blocks will also be deleted from these nodes to sync with the network.
> The `revertTransaction` hook can then be customized to delete or manipulate the transaction data present in the Indexer service's database.

Reviewer: I'd remove the first statement here. Chain reorgs do not always have to happen until a finalized height. Blocks are deleted only to the height (finalized or non-finalized, mostly non-finalzed) from where the node switches to a forked chain.

```suggestion
The `revertTransaction` hook can then be customized to delete or manipulate the transaction data present in the Indexer service's database. It basically reverts the effects of the corresponding `applyTransaction` hooks, as applicable.
```

> == Extending the Indexer service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Extending the Indexer microservice
```

The `applyTransaction` and `revertTransaction` hooks are arranged per command in a file and are grouped by the module that they belong to.

> Existing hooks are located in the {url_sharedIndexer_directory}[shared/indexer/transactionProcessor^] directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the hooks are placed under the {url_sharedIndexer_directory}[shared/indexer/transactionProcessor^] directory.
```

Command-specific hooks are always implemented within a single file and are grouped by the module.

> To extend Lisk Service, and implement hooks for a custom module, perform the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To extend Lisk Service and implement hooks for a custom module, perform the following steps:
```

. Create a sub-directory with the module name. For example: {url_token}[token^].
. Add {url_index}[index.js^] under the above directory.

> . Export a `MODULE_NAME` variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Define and export the `MODULE_NAME` variable.
```

> The value must match the module name as registered within the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value must exactly match the module name (in camelCasing) as registered within the application.
```

+
.index.js
[source,js]
----
const MODULE_NAME = 'token';

module.exports = {
	MODULE_NAME,
};
----
+
. Create a file specific to the command that requires the implementation of custom hooks. For example: {url_transfer}[transfer.js^].

> . Export a `COMMAND_NAME` variable. The value must match the command name as registered within the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Define and export the `COMMAND_NAME` variable. The value must exactly match the command name (in camelCasing) as registered within the application.
```

> You should also define database instances, import constants, and logger, etc.

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary to specify this statement here.
```suggestion
```

+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----

> const {
> 	Logger,
> 	DB: {
> 		MySQL: { getTableInstance },
> 	},
> } = require('lisk-service-framework');
> const config = require('../../../../config');
> 
> const { TRANSACTION_STATUS } = require('../../../constants');
> const { indexAccountAddress } = require('../../accountIndex');
> const { requestConnector } = require('../../../utils/request');
> 
> const logger = Logger();
> 
> const MYSQL_ENDPOINT = config.endpoints.mysql;
> 
> const transactionsTableSchema = require('../../../database/schema/transactions');
> 
> const getTransactionsTable = () => getTableInstance(transactionsTableSchema, MYSQL_ENDPOINT);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/**
 * Make necessary imports, and define the necessary helper methods and constants
*/
```

// Command specific constants
const COMMAND_NAME = 'transfer';

const EVENT_NAME_INITIALIZE_USER_ACCOUNT = 'initializeUserAccount';

// [...]
----
+

> . Take out the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and then store it in the Lisk Indexer service database via the `applyTransaction` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Extract the `recipientAddress` from the transaction and index it in the Lisk Indexer microservice's database via the `applyTransaction` hook.
```

+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
// [...]

const applyTransaction = async (blockHeader, tx, events, dbTrx) => {
	logger.trace(
		`Updating index for the account with address ${tx.params.recipientAddress} asynchronously.`,
	);
	indexAccountAddress(tx.params.recipientAddress);

	if (tx.executionStatus !== TRANSACTION_STATUS.SUCCESSFUL) return;

	tx = {
		...tx,
		...tx.params,
	};

	const filterInitializeUserAccountEvent = events.find(
		event =>
			event.name === EVENT_NAME_INITIALIZE_USER_ACCOUNT &&
			event.data.address === tx.params.recipientAddress &&
			event.topics.includes(tx.id),
	);

	if (filterInitializeUserAccountEvent) {
		const formattedTransaction = await requestConnector('formatTransaction', {
			transaction: tx,
			additionalFee: filterInitializeUserAccountEvent.data.initializationFee,
		});

		tx.minFee = formattedTransaction.minFee;
	}

	const transactionsTable = await getTransactionsTable();
	logger.trace(`Indexing transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
	await transactionsTable.upsert(tx, dbTrx);
	logger.debug(`Indexed transaction ${tx.id} contained in block at height ${tx.height}.`);
};

// [...]
----
+

> . In the case whereby the block is deleted, update the Lisk Indexer service database by deleting the corresponding `recipientAddress` through the `revertTransaction` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the case whereby the block is deleted, update the Lisk Indexer microservice database by deleting the corresponding `recipientAddress` through the `revertTransaction` hook.
```

+
.transfer.js
[source,js]
----
// [...]

const revertTransaction = async (blockHeader, tx, events, dbTrx) => {
	logger.trace(
		`Updating index for the account with address ${tx.params.recipientAddress} asynchronously.`,
	);
	indexAccountAddress(tx.params.recipientAddress);
};

module.exports = {
	COMMAND_NAME,
	applyTransaction,
	revertTransaction,
};
----
+ 

> . Now, whenever a token transfer transaction is executed on the chain, Lisk Indexer Service will take out the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and will keep it in the list of active accounts, which can be served to applications such as Lisk Wallet upon request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Now, whenever a token transfer transaction is executed on the chain, Lisk Service's Blockchain Indexer microservice will extract the `recipientAddress` of the transaction and will index it in the list of active accounts, which can be served to applications such as Lisk Wallet upon request.
```

> For more examples of extending the Indexer service for various modules and their commands, see the following list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more examples of extending the Indexer microservice for various modules and their commands, see the following list:
```
